# Lecture 7 - Logic
---

So far the only _examples_ of posets I've talked about in the lectures
are the real numbers \\(\mathbb{R}\\) and the natural numbers
\\(\mathbb{N}\\) with their usual order \\(\le\\). Of course every
natural number is a real number, so there's a function

<center>$$i : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}$$</center>

sending any natural number \\(x \in \mathbb{N}\\) to the exact same
number regarded as a real number. This function is monotone, so you
now know instinctively to ask this question:

**Puzzle 21.** Does the monotone function \\(i : \mathbb{N} \to
\mathbb{R}\\) have a left adjoint? Does it have a right adjoint? If
so, what are they?

This is nice, but we need to look at other examples to appreciate the
diversity of posets. Both \\(\mathbb{N}\\) and \\(\mathbb{Z}\\) have a
very special property. They are **[totally ordered
sets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_order)**: posets such that

<center>$$\textrm{ for all } x, y,  \textrm{ either } x \le y \textrm{ or } y \le x .$$</center>

If you want to show off, you can call totally ordered sets **tosets**.
They're also called **linearly ordered**, because you can imagine them
as lines:

<center><img src = "http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/mathematical/7_sketches/natural_numbers_hasse_diagram.png"></center>

Totally ordered sets are limiting. Suppose you're trying to order
foods on a restaurant menu based on how much you like them. What's
better: a cheese sandwich or a pancake? There may be no answer,
because you like them in _different ways_. To get a totally ordered
set you have to ignore this and arrange all the foods in a line.

In standard economics we _do_ try to arrange everything in a line. We
measure the worth of everything in real numbers: numbers of _dollars_.
There's even a theorem to justify this, proved by [von Neumann and
Morgenstern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann%E2%80%93Morgenstern_utility_theorem).
But the assumptions of this theorem don't hold in real life. It's
mainly just _convenient_ to measure value, or "utility", in real
numbers. With computer technologies we could set up cryptocurrencies
based on other posets. But will we?

Luckily, human thought as a whole is not limited to total orders. A
good example is logic. Logic, in its simplest form, is about
statements \\(P, Q, R, \dots \\) and whether one statement implies
another. If \\(P\\) implies \\(Q\\) we often write \\(P \implies
Q\\). There are many kinds of logic, but every kind I know, this
relation \\(\implies\\) makes statements into a preorder, since we
have

1) reflexivity: \\(P \implies P\\)

2) transitivity: if \\(P \implies Q\\) and \\( Q \implies R \\) then
\\(P \implies R\\).

Often people make this preorder into a poset by imposing this rule:

3) antisymmetry: if \\(P \implies Q\\) and \\(Q \implies P\\) then
\\(P = Q \\).

This amounts to decreeing that we count two statements as "the same"
if they both imply each other. We may not always want to do this.
And we certainly don't want a linear order: it's easy to find examples
of statements such that neither \\( P \implies Q\\) nor \\(Q \implies
P\\), like "I am a millionaire" and "I am happy", or "I like this food
for breakfast" and "I like this food for lunch".

So, to continue our study of preorders, posets, monotone functions and
Galois connections, we'll turn to logic! Category-theoretic logic is
an enormous wonderful field, but we'll just do a bit of logic based on
the poset of subsets of a set, followed by a bit of logic based on the
poset of partitions of a set. The latter underlies Fong and Spivak's
discussion of "generative effects" in Chapter 1.

[Click here to read the original discussion.](https://forum.azimuthproject.org/discussion/1909/lecture-7-chapter-1-logic/p1)
